`Color foundations` enhancements - `Website` docs (#2335)
hashicorp/design-system: website/docs/foundations/colors/partials/guidelines/guidelines.md

## Color styles and tokens

Color naming and use can vary depending on context and tooling. This overview will clarify what naming conventions are typically used and how they align to the HDS standards implemented in our libraries.

In Figma, reusable colors are referred to as “Styles.” They are categorized and stored in the right sidebar for fills, borders, and other properties that accept color values. Styles directly reference a HEX value but cannot reference each other (known as aliasing for Tokens). This means when we provide Figma Styles for semantic usage (like `Foreground / Primary`), the HEX value (`#3B3D45`) is directly referenced instead of the Core Palette color (`Palette / Neutral / Neutral 600`). 

> In code, we refer to styles as “Tokens.” They are generated from agnostic files, in our case, JSON and create atomic colors regardless of what platform or framework is used. For example, Core Palette colors like `--token-color-palette-neutral-600` are directly referenced in `--token-color-foreground-primary`. 

Reviewer: I believe the comma is in the wrong place here and should be after "JSON" not before

> files, in our case JSON**,**

![Image showing a pyramid of how color inheritence works in tokens](/assets/foundations/color/colors-what-are-semantic-tokens.png)

## What are semantic colors

The Semantic Palette helps ensure proper color usage across applications by embedding meaning directly into the name. The **element** and the **role** are referenced in the name to help make more informed color decisions.

HDS organizes semantic tokens into **element** categories:

- **Foreground** - For elements such as text, links, statuses, and icons.

> - **Border** - For borders on components, containers or dividers.

Reviewer: Missing an Oxford comma in this list

> For borders on components, containers, or dividers.

- **Surface** - For the background (or surface) of a component or container
- **Page** - For page backgrounds

Examples of **role** naming conventions include: 

- Strong
- Primary
- Faint
- Action (not to be used outside of context)
- Disabled (not to be used outside of context)

### Foreground colors

Foreground colors are used for elements such as text, links, and icons.

Some common examples of semantic foreground colors include:

- `Foreground / Strong` for headings and secondary links
- `Foreground / Primary` for body text 
- `Foreground / Faint` for less prominent text and UI elements.

> - `Foreground / Action` for primary call to actions such as links

Reviewer: Should be "calls to action"

![Image showing different text based components with their color tokens associated to them](/assets/foundations/color/colors-foreground-examples.png)

Use status foreground colors to help contextualize responses from user actions or to indicate status within a UI. These colors should be used sparingly and within the context of specific components like [Alerts](/components/alert#color), [Toasts](/components/toast#color) or [Badges](/components/badge#color).

![Image showing different badges with their associated foreground colors](/assets/foundations/color/colors-status-examples.png)

### Border colors

> Use border colors for borders on components, containers or dividers.

Reviewer: Oxford comma missing in this list

> ...containers**,** or dividers.

Some common examples of border colors include:

- `Border / Strong` for secondary Button border
- `Border / Primary` for Card border or divider
- `Border / {Status color}` for Alert borders

![Image showing different borders applied on a button, card and alert](/assets/foundations/color/colors-border-examples.png)

### Surface colors

Use surface colors for the background (or surface) of a component or container. 

Some common examples of surface colors include:

- `Surface / Strong` for the neutral Badge.
- `Surface / Primary` for component containers.
- `Surface / Faint` for the secondary Button.
- `Surface / {Status color}` for Alert background.

![Image showing different surface colors being applied to a badge, card, button and alert](/assets/foundations/color/colors-surface-examples.png)

### Page colors

> Page colors are used for page backgrounds. Our components do not use these tokens, however, we recommend `Page / Primary` as the primary background color and `Page / Faint` as a means to create a secondary level on the page for highlighting information, if necessary.

Reviewer: This might be just me not being as familiar with the writing standards but sometimes we use Our/We and sometimes we use third person

### Disabled colors

[According to WCAG](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/contrast-minimum.html), contrast ratios are only necessary for active elements, therefore, disabled colors do not pass color contrast requirements. Even though we [do not recommend the usage of disabled elements](/patterns/disabled-patterns), there may be instances where they are needed.

In rare instances where token usage is necessary outside of the context of a component, following these standards ensures consistency across our UI:

> - `Foreground / Disabled` for disabled text, icons or other foreground elements

Reviewer: Missing Oxford comma

> ...icons**,** or other foreground...

- `Border / Primary` for disabled borders
- `Surface / Interactive-Disabled` for disabled backgrounds on interactive elements

![Image showing a disabled input with all the associated semantic tokens](/assets/foundations/color/colors-disabled-examples.png)

## Accessible color combinations

> We intend to be conformant with WCAG 2.2 Level AA requirements. In terms of color contrast, this means a luminosity ratio of 4.5:1 for normal sized text, and 3:1 for large text. Further details are outlined on [WCAG’s understanding of Contrast (Minimum)](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG22/Understanding/contrast-minimum.html). By default, semantic color tokens provide accessible color combinations out of the box with their associated naming conventions, while using palette colors requires manual validation, especially if you plan to mix and match. As an example, if a color has a semantic status name in it, then other associated status colors will be accessible.

Reviewer: Nitpicky: should we be more explicit about what "normal" and "large" mean here? Maybe not since we direct users to read more on the w3c site but in my experience some designers assume 16px is "large" and some are unsure where the line is

Author: I can add in parenthesis for "normal sized text" to say commonly 16px

## Color styles and tokens

> Color naming syntax and use can vary depending on context and tooling. This overview will clarify what naming conventions are typically used and how they align to the HDS standards implemented in our libraries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Color-naming syntax and usage can vary depending on context and tooling. This overview will clarify what naming conventions are typically used and how they align with the HDS standards implemented in our libraries.
```

In Figma, reusable colors are referred to as “Styles.” They are categorized and stored in the right sidebar for fills, borders, and other properties that accept color values. Styles directly reference a HEX value but cannot reference each other (known as aliasing for Tokens). This means when we provide Figma Styles for semantic usage (like `Foreground/Primary`), the HEX value (`#3B3D45`) is directly referenced instead of the Core Palette color (`Palette/Neutral/Neutral 600`). 

> In code, we refer to styles as “Tokens.” They are generated from agnostic files, in our case JSON, and create atomic colors regardless of what platform or framework is used. For example, Core Palette colors like `--token-color-palette-neutral-600` are directly referenced in `--token-color-foreground-primary`. 

Reviewer 2: Suggestion:
For clarity, perhaps change:
"They are generated from agnostic files"
to
"They are generated from platform-agnostic files"

(I know you explain it after but I was initially confused until I got to that part of the sentence as "agnostic" is normally qualified as to what something is agnostic to.)

Author: Fair point, ill update :)

> In code, we refer to styles as “Tokens.” They are generated from platform-agnostic files, in our case JSON, and create atomic colors regardless of what platform or framework is used. For example, Core Palette colors like `--token-color-palette-neutral-600` are directly referenced in `--token-color-foreground-primary`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In code, we refer to reusable colors as “Tokens.” 
```

> In code, we refer to styles as “Tokens.” They are generated from platform-agnostic files, in our case JSON, and create atomic colors regardless of what platform or framework is used. For example, Core Palette colors like `--token-color-palette-neutral-600` are directly referenced in `--token-color-foreground-primary`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In code, we refer to reusable colors as “Tokens.” They are generated from platform-agnostic files, in our case JSON, and create atomic colors regardless of what platform or framework is used. For example, Core Palette colors like `--token-color-palette-neutral-600` are directly referenced in `--token-color-foreground-primary`. 
```

Reviewer: Nitpicky suggestion to mirror the section above and make it clearer that styles don't necessarily equal tokens since they are constructed differently but both are "reusable colors"

Author: I like the suggestion, ill add to the update :)

![Image showing a pyramid of how color inheritence works in tokens](/assets/foundations/color/colors-what-are-semantic-tokens.png)

## What are semantic colors?

The Semantic Palette helps ensure proper color usage across applications by embedding meaning directly into the name.

Semantic colors were designed to be used together, ensuring they meet accessibility standards and look visually pleasing. For example, foreground colors are intended to be used with surface or page colors. In many cases, it is important to use specific contextual naming conventions, such as status colors, together. Here are some examples of semantic color combinations with their respective contrast ratios:
- `Foreground/Strong` on `Surface/Primary` nets a ratio of 19.54:1

> - `Foreground/Success-on Surface` on `Surface/Success` nets a ratio of 5.37:1

Author: The name of the figma color style is `Foreground/Success-on Surface`
<img width="234" alt="Screenshot 2024-08-16 at 1 06 50 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/55f03bd6-e09d-4c0c-bd7b-d8123a3dbbce">

> - `Foreground/Success-on Surface` on `Surface/Success` nets a ratio of 5.37:1

Author: You're not wrong though because we also have a `Foreground/Success` token too lol

- `Foreground/Primary` on `Surface/Primary` nets a ratio of 10.82:1
- `Foreground/Action` on `Surface/Faint` nets a ratio of 4.86:1

> ![Image showing color ratios of a card with details inside of it](/assets/foundations/color/colors-semantic-tokens-accessibility-examples.png)

Author: Thanks for letting know and fixing the alt text. Will be sure to remember that next time!

The **element** and the **role** are referenced in the name to help make more informed color decisions.

HDS organizes semantic tokens into **element** categories:

- **Foreground** - For elements such as text, links, statuses, and icons.
- **Border** - For borders on components, containers, or dividers.
- **Surface** - For the background (or surface) of a component or container
- **Page** - For page backgrounds

Examples of **role** naming conventions include: 

- Strong
- Primary
- Faint
- Action (not to be used outside of context)
- Disabled (not to be used outside of context)

### Foreground colors

Foreground colors are used for elements such as text, links, and icons.

Some common examples of semantic foreground colors include:

- `Foreground/Strong` for headings and secondary links
- `Foreground/Primary` for body text 
- `Foreground/Faint` for less prominent text and UI elements.
- `Foreground/Action` for primary call to action such as links

![Samples of text with their color tokens labelled](/assets/foundations/color/colors-foreground-examples.png)

> Use status foreground colors to help contextualize responses from user actions or to indicate status within a UI. These colors should be used sparingly and within the context of specific components like [Alerts](/components/alert#color), [Toasts](/components/toast#color) or [Badges](/components/badge#color).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use status foreground colors to help contextualize responses from user actions or to indicate status within a UI. These colors should be used sparingly and within the context of specific components like [Alerts](/components/alert#color), [Toasts](/components/toast#color), or [Badges](/components/badge#color).
```

![Sample positive, warning, and error status badges with their associated foreground color tokens labelled.](/assets/foundations/color/colors-status-examples.png)

### Border colors

Some common examples of border colors include:

- `Border/Strong` for secondary Button border
- `Border/Primary` for Card border or divider
- `Border/{Status color}` for Alert borders

> ![Sample borders applied on a button, card and alert with the border color tokens labelled](/assets/foundations/color/colors-border-examples.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Sample borders applied on a button, card, and alert with the border color tokens labelled](/assets/foundations/color/colors-border-examples.png)
```

### Surface colors

Use surface colors for the background (or surface) of a component or container. 

Some common examples of surface colors include:

- `Surface/Strong` for the neutral Badge.
- `Surface/Primary` for component containers.
- `Surface/Faint` for the secondary Button.
- `Surface/{Status color}` for Alert background.

> ![Image showing different surface colors being applied to a badge, card, button and alert](/assets/foundations/color/colors-surface-examples.png)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![Sample surface colors being applied to a badge, card, button and alert with the surface color token labelled.](/assets/foundations/color/colors-surface-examples.png)
```

> ![Sample surface colors being applied to a badge, card, button and alert with the surface color token labelled.](/assets/foundations/color/colors-surface-examples.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Sample surface colors being applied to a badge, card, button, and alert with the surface color token labelled.](/assets/foundations/color/colors-surface-examples.png)
```

### Page colors

> Page colors are used for page backgrounds. HDS components do not use these tokens, however, we recommend `Page/Primary` as the primary background color and `Page/Faint` as a means to create a secondary level on the page for highlighting information, if necessary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Page colors are used for page backgrounds. HDS components do not use these tokens; however, we recommend `Page/Primary` as the primary background color and `Page/Faint` as a means to create a secondary level on the page for highlighting information, if necessary.
```

## Accessible color combinations

> We intend to be conformant with WCAG 2.2 Level AA requirements. In terms of color contrast, this means a luminosity ratio of 4.5:1 for normal sized text, and 3:1 for large text (commonly 22px). Further details are outlined on [WCAG’s understanding of Contrast (Minimum)](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG22/Understanding/contrast-minimum.html). By default, semantic color tokens provide accessible color combinations out of the box with their associated naming conventions, while using palette colors requires manual validation, especially if you plan to mix and match. As an example, if a color has a semantic status name in it, then other associated status colors will be accessible. 

Reviewer 2: For this part: "As an example, if a color has a semantic status name in it" does this mean that if the color **_name_** includes a semantic status...?

Author: This would be referencing things like `Foreground/Success` or `Foreground/Success-On Surface` would pair with `Surface/Success`.

> It is important to note that we [do not recommend the usage of disabled elements](/patterns/disabled-patterns) especially isolating disabled colors out of context, as they are not accessible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is important to note that we [do not recommend the usage of disabled elements](/patterns/disabled-patterns), especially isolating disabled colors out of context, as they are not accessible.
```

> It is important to note that we [do not recommend the usage of disabled elements](/patterns/disabled-patterns), especially isolating disabled colors out of context, as they are not accessible.

Reviewer: Love that you snuck this in 😈 great placement and reminder for people

### Using palette colors

> The Core Palette is available if semantic colors do not meet your needs. These styles are usage-agnostic, which can introduce challenges in consistently scaling designs but allow more freedom and flexibility in color pairing. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Core Palette is available if semantic colors do not meet your needs. These styles are usage-agnostic, which can introduce challenges in consistently scaling designs but also allow more freedom and flexibility in color pairing. 
```

> The Core Palette is available if semantic colors do not meet your needs. These styles are usage-agnostic, which can introduce challenges in consistently scaling designs but also allow more freedom and flexibility in color pairing. 

Reviewer: This is 👩‍🍳 💋 (chef's kiss) — concise and clear without telling consumers not to use palette colours

## Color styles and tokens

Color naming and use can vary depending on context and tooling. This overview will clarify what naming conventions are typically used and how they align to the HDS standards implemented in our libraries.

> In Figma, reusable colors are referred to as “Styles” and are categorized and stored in the “style panel” to be referenced in fills, borders, and other properties that accept color values. Styles directly reference a HEX value but are unable to reference each other in Figma (known as aliasing in token terminology). This means when we provide Figma styles for semantic usage (like `Foreground/Primary` with a value of `#3B3D45`) a HEX value is referenced directly  instead of a base palette color (like `Palette/Neutral/Neutral 0` which is also `#3B3D45`). Even though these two are the same, Figma’s current configuration requires manual maintenance if any of the base values are updated.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In Figma, reusable colors are referred to as “Styles” and are categorized and stored in the “style panel” to be referenced in fills, borders, and other properties that accept color values. Styles directly reference a HEX value but are unable to reference each other in Figma (known as aliasing in token terminology). This means when we provide Figma styles for semantic usage (like `Foreground / Primary` with a value of `#3B3D45`), the HEX value is referenced directly instead of a base palette color (like `Palette / Neutral / Neutral 0`, which is also `#3B3D45`). Even though these two are the same, Figma’s current configuration requires manual maintenance if any of the base values are updated.
```
For the other Foreground / ... instances, you have a space between the slash and the text. I noticed that this one doesn't have a space. Is this intentional, or should it follow the same pattern as the space?

Author: good catch, will be committing 👀

> In Figma, reusable colors are referred to as “Styles” and are categorized and stored in the “style panel” to be referenced in fills, borders, and other properties that accept color values. Styles directly reference a HEX value but are unable to reference each other in Figma (known as aliasing in token terminology). This means when we provide Figma styles for semantic usage (like `Foreground / Primary` with a value of `#3B3D45`), the HEX value is referenced directly instead of a base palette color (like `Palette / Neutral / Neutral 0`, which is also `#3B3D45`). Even though these two are the same, Figma’s current configuration requires manual maintenance if any of the base values are updated.

Reviewer 5: Does this read better as "and"?

```suggestion
In Figma, reusable colors are referred to as “Styles” and are categorized and stored in the “style panel” to be referenced in fills, borders, and other properties that accept color values. Styles directly reference a HEX value and are unable to reference each other in Figma (known as aliasing in token terminology). This means when we provide Figma styles for semantic usage (like `Foreground / Primary` with a value of `#3B3D45`), the HEX value is referenced directly instead of a base palette color (like `Palette / Neutral / Neutral 0`, which is also `#3B3D45`). Even though these two are the same, Figma’s current configuration requires manual maintenance if any of the base values are updated.
```

> In code we refer to “styles” as “Tokens” because they are generated from agnostic files (JSON in our case), and create atomic colors regardless of what platform or framework is used. For example, palette colors like `--token-color-palette-neutral-600` are directly referenced in `--token-color-foreground-primary`. This reduces the need to manually update all semantic values and their references to base palette colors through the automatic cascade of aliasing and inheritance.

Reviewer 5: [suggestion]
```suggestion
In code we refer to “styles” as “Tokens” because they are generated from agnostic files (JSON in our case), and create atomic colors regardless of what platform or framework is consuming them. For example, palette colors like `--token-color-palette-neutral-600` is directly referenced by `--token-color-foreground-primary`. This reduces the need to manually update all semantic values and their references to base palette colors through the automatic cascade of aliasing and inheritance.
```

> ![Image showing a pyramid of how color inheritence works in tokens](/assets/foundations/color/colors-what-are-semantic-tokens.png)

Reviewer 6: Ah, I see what you did there. This feels confusing because they are not 1:1 aliases, as the top two layers require some manipulation. Could you use an example where there is a direct 1:1 mapping for all levels? For example, you could do something like this: 

<img width="300" alt="color-token-abstraction" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e070387c-0f4b-4f55-a67b-5f18dd605102">

> ![Image showing a pyramid of how color inheritence works in tokens](/assets/foundations/color/colors-what-are-semantic-tokens.png)

Reviewer 6: I see you added the token and Figma mappings, but the colors used didn't change (two with opacity), which isn't an entirely accurate representation of how aliasing works. If needed, please work with @jorytindall tomorrow to find a more suitable example.

> ![Image showing a pyramid of how color inheritence works in tokens](/assets/foundations/color/colors-what-are-semantic-tokens.png)

Author: Ok updated image to show what you have above

1. Strong
2. Primary
3. Faint
4. Disabled (not to be used outside of context)

### Foreground colors

Foreground colors are used for elements such as text, links, statuses, and icons.

Some common examples of semantic foreground colors include:
- `Foreground / Strong` for headings and secondary links
- `Foreground / Primary` for body text 
- `Foreground / Faint` for less prominent text and UI elements.
- `Foreground / Action` for primary call to actions such as links

![Image showing different text based components with their color tokens associated to them](/assets/foundations/color/colors-foreground-examples.png)

Use status foreground colors to help contextualize responses from user actions or to indicate status within a UI. These colors should be used sparingly and within the context of specific components like [Alerts](/components/alert#color), [Toasts](/components/toast#color) or [Badges](/components/badge#color).

![Image showing different badges with their associated foreground colors](/assets/foundations/color/colors-status-examples.png)

### Border colors

Use border colors for borders on components, containers or dividers.

> Some common examples of border colors include:
> - `Border / Strong` for secondary button border
> - `Border / Primary` for Card border or divider
> - `Border / {Status color}` for Alert borders

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Some common examples of border colors include:

- `Border / Strong` for secondary Button border
- `Border / Primary` for Card border or divider
- `Border / {Status color}` for Alert borders
```

![Image showing different borders applied on a button, card and alert](/assets/foundations/color/colors-border-examples.png)

### Surface colors

Use surface colors for the background (or surface) of a component or container. 

Some common examples of surface colors include:
- `Surface / Strong` for the neutral badge.
- `Surface / Primary` for component containers.
- `Surface / Faint` for the secondary button.
- `Surface / {Status color}` for Alert background.

![Image showing different surface colors being applied to a badge, card, button and alert](/assets/foundations/color/colors-surface-examples.png)

### Page colors

Page colors are used for page backgrounds. Our components do not use these tokens, however, we recommend `Page / Primary` as the primary background color and `Page / Faint` as a means to create a secondary level on the page for de-emphasized information, if necessary.

> ### Disabled colors

Author: Hmmmm maybe we should remove this section entirely? Especially because we do not advocate for consumers to do this, and because we don't describe other roles, this could be a more appropriate path forward.

Thoughts?

> ### Disabled colors

Author: Especially because we say:

> Disabled (not to be used outside of context)

> Disabled colors do not pass color contrast requirements. [According to WCAG](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/contrast-minimum.html), contrast ratios are only necessary for active elements. Even though we [do not recommend the usage of disabled elements](/patterns/disabled-patterns), there may be instances where they are needed.

Reviewer 5: [suggestion] Maybe these can be combined?
```suggestion
[According to WCAG](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/contrast-minimum.html), contrast ratios are only necessary for active elements, therefore, disabled colors do not pass color contrast requirements. Even though we [do not recommend the usage of disabled elements](/patterns/disabled-patterns), there may be instances where they are needed.
```

In rare instances where token usage is necessary outside of the context of a component, following these standards ensures consistency across our UI:
- `Foreground / Disabled` for disabled text, icons or other foreground elements

> - `Border / Primary` for disabled borders

Reviewer 6: This is not a semantic name for a disabled color.

> - `Border / Primary` for disabled borders

Author: I was looking to see if we had a disabled semantic color and we do not, so ill remove this 👀

### Using semantic tokens

Semantic colors were designed to be used together, ensuring they meet accessibility standards and look visually pleasing. For example, foreground colors are intended to be used with surface or page colors. In many cases, it is important to use specific contextual naming conventions, such as status colors, together. Here are some examples of semantic color combinations with their respective contrast ratios:
- `Foreground / Strong` on `Surface / Primary` nets a ratio of 19.54:1
- `Foreground / Success-on Surface` on `Surface / Success` nets a ratio of 5.37:1
- `Foreground / Primary` on `Surface / Primary` nets a ratio of 10.82:1
- `Foreground / Action` on `Surface / Faint` nets a ratio of 4.86:1

![Image showing color ratios of a card with details inside of it](/assets/foundations/color/colors-semantic-tokens-accessibility-examples.png)

### Using palette colors

> If semantic colors do not meet your needs, a set of base palette colors are also available. These styles are usage-agnostic, which can introduce challenges in consistently scaling a complex design but allow more freedom and flexibility in color pairing. Keep in mind when pairing colors on your own, accessible contrast ratios between adjacent colors must meet their respective values. You can use free tools like the [WebAIM contrast checker](https://webaim.org/resources/contrastchecker/) or [Stark’s Figma plugin](https://www.figma.com/community/plugin/732603254453395948/stark-contrast-accessibility-checker) to validate your color combination choices.

Reviewer 6: While these nods to accessibility, the information is more general than that. Would it be more valuable to move them under the "What are semantic colors?" section and bring them to an H2?

Author: Not a bad idea, I can move it.
